I hope you enjoy working through this code challenge.
It's going to be fairly involved, but I think you will find that the coding and conceptual knowledge
that you gain by the end of this code challenge will be worth the challenge.
So the goal here will be to see if we can identify neurons in the expansion part of the MLP layer of
one transformer block that are tuned to particular parts of speech, in particular nouns versus verbs.
What does it mean for a neuron to be tuned to some category?
That's just a phrasing that's used to indicate that a neuron has significantly stronger activation for
one category over others.
For example, if a particular neuron has strong activation to nouns, but not to verbs or adjectives,
or perhaps if a neuron has high activations to mammals, but not to invertebrates or inanimate objects.
By the way, as you work through this code challenge, I would like you to think about some of the challenges
in these exercises and how you might address some of the limitations and difficulties in these exercises
in potential follow up research.
I will get back to this at the end of the code, challenge the end of the video and discuss some of
my observations and comments.
Anyway, let's begin with exercise one.
The goal here is to import the Eleuther GPT neo model.
We have worked with this model previously in this course.
For example, in this lecture about fine tuning the model to emulate the writing style of Through the
Looking Glass and Edgar Allan Poe.
Next, you should import a list of the 100 common nouns and verbs, and I got some nice lists from this
person's GitHub site.
I have no idea who this person is, but I am grateful for their efforts to organize these lists of words
and put them online.
Anyway, for this part, you can just copy the code from the solutions or the helper files.
So this is really just about retrieving and formatting some data from a public GitHub repo.
So this exercise isn't so bad.
And now you should pause the video and get to work.
And I will switch to code briefly just to show you what you need to have before moving on to exercise
two.
Here are some of the libraries that we will need for this code.
Challenge some of these libraries I'm not going to use until a little bit later on, like this one we'll
use towards the end.
Okay.
So import those.
And now here I am importing the Eleuther tokenizer and also the model.
And here I'm switching it to eval mode.
Okay.
And then here is the list of verbs.
And to get this list basically you just need to have the URL for this text file.
And then yeah you can split it by new line and just import the first 100 verbs and that you see here.
So this is the first 100 that are provided in this list.
So that's for the verbs where the nouns it's exactly the same.
Uh now you can organize these to uh variables in different ways.
I chose to have separate variables for the verbs and the nouns.
If you chose to have all of the words in one list, then that's also fine.
That would be a list with 200 elements, and you would just need to know that, for example, the first
hundred are verbs and the next hundred are nouns.
There's a lot of personal choices that you can make when setting up these code challenges, and that's
completely fine as long as you are coding in a way that is consistent with the instructions that I'm
giving in the slides.
Before telling you about exercise two, I want to remind you of the key conceptual difference between
the attention and the MLP subblock of a transformer layer.
So this is a slide that I showed earlier in the course in the section on building a GPT.
The key idea that I want to remind you of here is that the attention sublayer integrates context from
surrounding tokens, whereas the MLP sublayer extracts and identifies features and categories from the
linear and non-linear combinations across the different tokens.
So therefore, if you want to look for category selectivity Activity inside an LM.
Based on previous research and on just general speculations.
It's good to start with the MLP layers.
Of course, you could also look for category selectivity in the attention layers, and you probably
will find some neurons here that are tuned to particular categories.
But at least for the context of this code challenge, we will just focus on the MLP sublayer.
In particular, we will be extracting the activation from the expansion neurons in the MLP layer.
So remember that the MLP sublayer has these two parts.
One part that expands the dimensionality.
And then after a non-linearity, the dimensionality contracts back to the dimensionality of the embedding
space, which for GPT two is 768.
So in this exercise, in this entire code challenge, and actually also in the next code challenge,
we are going to be specifically focusing on these expansion neurons in this layer.
Now for the small version of GPT two, this corresponds to 3072 neurons.
Of course that is a factor of four, an expansion factor of four from the 768 embeddings dimensions.
Now let me tell you about the goals for exercise two.
Here you should implant a hook to get the activations from that expansion layer of the MLP from the
ninth transformer block.
After you have installed a hook, you can test it just by passing in a bit of text and then you can
check that.
Well, first of all, check that you don't get any error messages that could indicate problems or maybe
typos, for example, with the hook function.
But then you also just want to make sure that the size of the activations that you get out is batch
by tokens by 3072.
You can use any random piece of text that you want.
Here we're not actually going to use this text in later exercises.
It's just for a sanity check for this exercise.
Okay, so that's it for exercise two.
Please pause the video and code away.
And now I will switch to code and show my solution.
I forgot to mention in the slides that I'm only using the CPU because we're not really doing a whole
lot of really intensive processing through this model.
So you can use the GPU if you want.
It will certainly save you some time.
But yeah, for this code challenge, the time you save from GPU might be on the order of seconds, tens
of seconds versus the amount of time it takes you to organize all the code to make sure that you're
using the GPU.
Anyway, so here I just wanted to print out the model architecture as a reminder in case we need to
use it.
So we specifically want the MLP from one of the transformer blocks.
And I said the transformer block.
So that corresponds to index eight.
Right.
Because it starts counting at zero.
And then which of these things do we want.
We want the C underscore FC which stands for Fully Connected, that has uh 768 neurons coming into it
and 3072 neurons coming out.
And these are the neurons here.
Before we get to the activation, the non-linearity, these are the activations that we want to hook
and extract from the model.
Okay.
So this is how you would access all of those.
And then I'm just defining some variable called n neurons.
This is just going to be convenient for using later on in the exercises.
So here is the hook function to grab the activations.
You can see that I'm creating these activations to be a dictionary, and I'm not going to do any concatenation.
So every time I run a forward pass it's going to overwrite the activations from the previous forward
pass.
That's fine.
I don't need to store all of them sequentially, although you can do that.
I'll talk about that more later.
But anyway, you do, it is fine as long as you are getting all of the activations out of it correctly.
Okay, so the hook goes into model dot transformer dot h for hidden layer.
And then this particular layer and I've soft coded this here in case you are curious.
You know you can also try what happens in the rest of this exercise if you pick a different layer.
Uh let's see MLP.
And then here is the register forward hook method.
And then I'm calling this outer function here implant hook.
As I mentioned a couple videos ago, the main point of having this outer function is to be able to soft
code this parameter here, which I then use to define this key for this activations dictionary variable
here.
So this is, you know, setting it up this way might be a little bit more complicated than is necessary
for this particular code challenge.
So if you chose to do it a simpler way then that's also fine.
But I wanted to do it this way.
So it's a little bit more general so that, you know, if you feel like also including the attention
layers, you could also have some attention activations being outputted into this same variable, this
same dictionary with a different key.
Okay.
Anyway, so then the idea is in the MLP block.
Then we get the inputs into the MLP block and then run it through the fully connected weights matrix.
And that is going to give us the results of the activations of all of the expansion neurons from this
MLP block before they are passed through the non-linearity.
Okay.
And then this line of code does the actual surgery to implant the hook.
Uh, so let's see.
Yeah.
Then here I'm just testing a little bit of data.
You can see that this goes through this forward pass goes through really fast.
So, uh, for an application like this, we don't really need to use the GPU.
Again.
I don't actually care what these numbers are.
I just want to make sure, first of all, that it works.
And second of all, that the shape of the output is consistent with what I'm expecting, which is one
sequence, five tokens, you know, whatever's not so many tokens and 3072 activations corresponding
to 3072 neurons.
Now we're starting to get to the important part of the code challenge.
The goal of exercise three is to get activations from those hooked MLP neurons from all of the 200 words
that you have imported.
Now, because those words are in a list and not embedded in text, you have to run a for loop over the
words to get the activations per word.
Now, depending on how you defined the hook function, this could mean that the activations variable
gets overwritten at each iteration in the for loop when you are processing each individual token through
the model.
Of course, that's completely fine.
You just have to be mindful of getting the activations out in a way that is consistent with how you
defined the hook function.
When you get all of the activations for all the 200 words, you can visualize them in two plots like
this.
So here on the left you see all the activations for all 3000 neurons and all 100 verbs.
Now it looks like there are just vertical stripes, but there actually is some individual variability
in here across the different tokens.
It's just that individual neurons have mean offsets that are preserved for all of the individual words.
So this is how I visualized the verbs here.
I visualized the nouns activation in a slightly different way.
What I did here was calculate the average activation across all of the 100 nouns for each neuron.
So that's why there's only one dot per neuron.
This is just visualizing the average across all of the 100 nouns for each neuron.
And by the way, here you also see the mean offsets for all the different words.
In fact, it looks like the entire distribution is shifted to the left.
So the average across the population looks like somewhere around minus one.
Anyway, for this exercise, you can just extract and visualize the activations.
In the next exercise, we're going to start performing some statistical analyses to look for category
selectivity.
So that's the instructions for exercise three.
Please pause the video and start working.
And now I will switch to code and show my solution.
I am going to store all of the activations in this tensor here.
So a 3D cube of data of size two corresponding to the two categories.
So nouns and verbs.
And then I have the number of words 100 for both categories.
And then I have the number of neurons.
So 3072.
Okay.
And then I have a for loop here over all of the words.
So here this part is just for the verbs.
This part is just for the nouns.
So here I am.
Let's see.
This is this particular verb in the list of verbs.
And then I encode this to get a token.
And then I push it through the model.
Of course I'm using with torch.
Nograd.
Because I don't want to calculate any gradients or any anything like that.
Okay, so this will notice I don't have any output here because I don't actually need the output logits.
All I need are the activations variables to be created, which happens when I run through the forward
pass here.
Okay, so then I get the activations for the hook name that was this MLP layer.
And then squeeze and detach.
That basically just detaches everything from the computational graph converts it into numpy because
I initialize this variable to be numpy.
So if you would have initialized this to be a torch variable, then you would not want to convert this
into numpy, but just for convenience for later on.
It's easier just to have this in numpy format.
Anyway, here's a question.
Why do I write mean dim equals one?
First of all, what is the dimension of index one that I'm averaging over?
Well, if we go back here, we can see that that first dimension is batches.
There's only one batch.
And then the third dimension of course is the neurons.
The second dimension is the tokens.
Now the thing is these are all individual words.
So ideally they would all be just one token.
But there's no guarantee that every single one of these individual words corresponds to one token.
So therefore, just in case one of the words happens to be maybe two tokens, then I'm going to average
over the activation for all of the tokens in each of the words.
And so that's why I have this bit of code here.
Okay.
So that goes into all activations for this word index and for zero.
So the first dimension that corresponds to the verbs and for all the neurons.
This code over here is nearly identical to this code.
Except here I'm using the verbs.
Here I'm using the nouns here I'm inserting the results into the first index of this dimension, and
here index one.
So that took around 13 seconds.
And if you're using the GPU maybe that would have taken 2 or 3 seconds.
So either way not so bad.
Okay.
And then here we get the plot of all the activations.
Now there isn't really a whole lot that I want to say about this.
As I mentioned in the slides, you do see that there are some consistent offsets of the neurons.
So there are some neurons that just have more negative activations for all of the words that we're processing
here.
And yeah, you also see, I don't know if you can see this on your screen, uh, in the video screen,
but you can probably see it on your screen that there are these, like horizontal bands indicating that
there are also certain words that just have a relatively, uh, offset, uh, compared to the other
words.
That's what you see, like these individual, uh, dots here.
This would be the average for all of the nouns.
So this doesn't correspond to any one of these.
But you know, if you made a plot like this for the nouns, you would probably see that this particular
neuron looks a little bit different, uh, across the horizontal axis.
We're about halfway through this code challenge.
I'm going to break the video here to give you an opportunity to get out of your chair, stretch your
legs, splash some water on your face when you're feeling refreshed.
Come back for the next video where we will complete this code challenge.